today I'm Norman Wildberger this is the fourth of
a series on foundations of mathematics we're going
to talk about subtraction and division today so
so far what we've done is we've established the
fundamental objects in mathematics and natural
numbers and for us we have a very simplified way
of thinking about those those are just strings
of 1 so here's 1 1 1 1 1 1 and so on we have
two operations addition and multiplication which
are defined in terms of these strings of ones and
pretty simple in that chiral way already with this
framework we can ask many interesting questions
and we can develop quite a lot of subject called
number theory so let's just do a little bit of
that because we'll have some bearing on what
comes afterwards so a few definitions suppose
that we have three numbers K m and N and K times
M equals n another reminder that means that n is
K groups of M K groups of them in such a case we
say that K and M are factors of n are factors of
n another definition if n is equal to M times M
first of all we introduce the notation M Squared
for that so M Squared just means M times M and
then we say that the number n is a square so one
is a square 4 is a square and the next square
is 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 11 11 9 for 9 yet next n is a
prime if it's only factors are 1 and n itself we
purposely exclude one from being a prime so 1 is
not a product here on our list of the first few
Prime's there's two there's three there's five
and then there's another number called 1 1 1 1
one one and then a few more here on the other
side we have composite numbers numbers which are
not prime so 4 is equal to 2 times 2 so it has
factors 2 here is 6 equals 2 times 3 and then a
few more prime numbers and complex numbers we can
talk about questions involving prime numbers for
example twin primes we can formulate that even
with this very elementary framework now let's go
on to subtraction and division subtraction and
division are inverse operations to our basic
operations of addition and multiplication the
easiest one is subtraction let's do that one first
we defined subtraction in terms of addition if K
plus M equals n then we say that K is equal
to n minus M what that means is here we got K
ones we're adding M ones to get n ones that means
that if we take n ones and we take away M once we
get K ones so this process of taking away is the
opposite of adding on and that's what subtraction
means so for example 5 minus 3 is 2 it is we take
5 we take away 3 these 3 here a we get to always
say that 5 is equal to 2 plus 3 so 5 minus 3
is equal to 2 and here's another example with
numbers whose names we don't have but one one one
one one one one one one nine eleven eleven eleven
to take this number we have to subtract ones
for these so there's one there's one one one
one one so to subtract all of those ones leaving
us with these three ones it's important to note
that n minus M is only defined if n is bigger
than M if n is equal to M or n is less than M
then it's not defined you might say well can
we subtract 4 from 4 well we could eglee but
we don't have a name yet for a zero so we would
just get nothing and we don't have a symbol for
that so we prefer not to consider that case yet so
only if n is bigger than M can we define n minus
n all right so the laws of subtraction they are
following once and they're analogous but somewhat
different to associate of laws for addition and
distributive laws for addition so the first one
is n minus M plus cake one equals n minus M minus
K all these operations are our binary they only
take two at a time so we always have to do two
operations at a time and plus M minus K equals
n plus M minus K and perhaps the trickiest one n
minus M minus K equals n minus M plus K let's see
illustrate that one with an example so 5 minus 4
minus 1 well 4 minus 1 is 3 so 5 minutes 3 should
be 2 and indeed if we take 5 minus 4 and add 1 we
get 1 plus 1 that is 2 then 2 distributive laws n
times n minus K equals n times M minus n times K
we use the same convention as for addition namely
the multiplication here takes priority over the
minus negative and the other one n minus M times
K equals n times K minus M times K and the proofs
or the reasons for these laws are very much in the
same spirit as the laws for addition that and
multiplication that we've already looked at in
the previous videos so I think I will leave that
to you it's not really anything particularly new
about the proofs please now let's have a look
at division division is the hardest of the four
main operations to understand it is the inverse
operation to multiplication so the definition is
if K times M equals n then we say that K equals
n divided by M and we'll use this notation n
divided by M so for example two times three is
this that means two groups of three there's one
group of three there's another group of three this
number is 1 1 1 1 1 1 alright so inverting that it
means that if we take this number and ask how many
groups of three are in it the answer is 2 so this
number 1 1 1 1 1 1 divided by 3 is 2 so telling
us that the number of groups of 3 in here is to
note n over m is only defined if m is a factor of
n we require that m be a factor of n so that we
can write n as K times M otherwise this division
is at this point not allowed we want the result of
division to be another natural numbers so we are
not working in the realm of fractions yet that's
considerably more advanced we're just sticking
with natural numbers it's a very important point
ok so a Division has some some rules K over
m plus a no ram equals k plus n over m simple
identity rule n divided by 1 is n here n times K
divided by M times K that's the same as n divided
by M if we have two of these n divided by M and we
multiplied by K divided by L so we're thinking of
this as being an SD and this is being an entity
able to multiply these two natural numbers and
that's the same as n times K divided by M times
L and over here perhaps the most complicated one
and divide it by M that's a natural number if
we divide that by another Division K divided by
L so this natural number divided by this natural
number that's equal to n times N / M times K one
point about these relations we said that division
was only defined in case the denominator here is
a factor of the numerator so in all these
formulas we assume that the meaning is if
both sides of the formula makes sense in other
words are well defined then the two sides are
equal we don't claim that if one side is equal
one side is well defined then the other side is
well defined these laws need some discussion and
we are going to talk about them and why they are
true and it's really an important and difficult
aspect of sort of primary school mathematics to
understand these laws but next in the next video
I want to do something a little bit different I
want to discuss the implications of what we've
done so far for primary school education so we're
going to talk about what this approach can tell
us about how we should be teaching children basic
mathematics I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger thanks for listening